
Unlike primary storage, secondary storage is non-volatile. If power is lost to a secondary storage device, data is retained. Different types of secondary storage devices are specialised for their different use case, they may vary in durability, read/write speed, capacity, portability, and cost.

In a hard drive, concentric tracks containing sectors make up a single disk. These disks, called platters, are spun up to 7200 rpm where a read write head can read or write data to the platter. Data is stored in the polarity of each cell on each platter in each track in each sector. Alternating charge indicates a binary pattern on the disk. A change in polarity is read as a one, as there is a clear different in current that is induced by these magnetic cells in the read/write head.

Capacity of hard drives can be increased by reducing the space between platters, and therefore being able to add an entirely new disk. Magnetic cells can also be arranged in different ways in order to increase their density.

Optical disk storage is available as read only or read and rewritable formats. An optical disk stores data in the form of pits and lands and a laser. A laser is shone onto an optical disk, and reflects when it hits a land. It does not reflect when the laser hits a pit. Measuring the reflection can allow binary data to be stored on an optical disk, based on the reflection of a laser off of a reflective surface. In different optical disk standards, different lasers can burn smaller holes and therefore increase the amount of information packed onto a standard size disk.

NAND memory cells contain no moving parts. Electrons are trapped inside a cell to represent a 1 or zero by floating gate transistors. A solid state storage device has a limited amount of reads and writes, because NAND memory cells eventually degrade. Individual cells are combined into blocks. An electron trapped inside a layer is read as a 0, any electrons outside the layer are read as a 1. Data can only be read, written, or deleted in blocks, and data has to be deleted before being overwritten. Individual cells cannot be changed independently. A solid state disk (SSD) contains millions of NAND flash memory cells. Cells are managed by a controller that organised pages and blocks of memory. Advantages of an SSD over a hard drive are that SSDs are significantly faster due to the removal of moving parts, lower power consumption, silent operation, lighter weight, and more durable.

Flash storage works by storing charge to represent a 1 (presence) or a 0 (absence) using MOSFET transistors. In the middle gate, the control gate and the floating gate are insulated on all sides by silicon. The floating gate holds charge that flows from the source to the drain. The control gate can be activated during this time in order to trap electrons in this floating gate. The control gate can also remove or read the contents of the floating gate.

Often, companies will invest in server based storage. On these servers, many hard drives are put into what is called a "RAID" array. RAID stands for Redundant Array of Inexpensive Devices. Most companies use RAID 5, where data is placed across 3 hard drives, with a 4th dedicated to checking the other data, like a parity bit. Hard drives are used due to their affordable price as well as high capacity.
