
A hash table is an [[Queues and ADTs|ADT]] that can find any record in a set of data almost instantly. The address of the data is calculated from the data itself, using a hashing algorithm. Large data sets can be organised this way so that each record has a unique address. A simple hashing algorithm is to assign 1000 slots to hold records, each with a 4 digit key. Divide the key by the number of slots and find the remainder, which is the address. Address = key % slots. A collision can occur when an algorithm generates the same address for primary keys. Less collisions occur with more slots.

Collisions can be dealt with by putting the item in the next slot available. This can however lead to clustering of items in the table. An alternative algorithm is to increment how many slots are skipped by adding a constant, instead of repeatedly incrementing by 1. More and more collisions occur when more and more items are added to the hash table. The table size needs to be large enough so that the load factor is not more than about 50 to 70 percent of the table size. Using a prime number as the table size allows for there to always be a space, given that the table is not full, for an item when using any value to skip.

Other hashing algorithms include the mid-square and the folding method algorithms. The mid-square method is to square the item, extract a portion (for example the middle two digits) of the resulting number, and mod to get an address. The folding method is to divide the item into equal (as much as it can be) sized pieces, adding the pieces together, and performing a mod operation to get a valid address. For example 5873 goes to 58+73 = 131, 131 MOD size of table. Alphanumeric items can be used with the folding method using the ord() function.
