
There are two types of networks, Peer to Peer (P2P) or Client-Server. P2P is where every computer is connected to one another in order to host files or provide a service. A client-server network features a central server that hosts files and services, that every other computer connects to.

## Client server model:

In a client server network, the server is a powerful computer which provides services or resources required by any client through a response. A client is a computer that requests said services or resources through a query. Terminals are another name for clients of a central server. The role of a client in this model is to send requests to a server, which then responds to the request. This response causes a reply to the client, so that they know the response was received. The role of the server is to listen to requests. In order to enact the request, it may need to send a request to another server, where it then becomes the client. This model is suitable for many different types of organisation, and can often require a specialist IT team in order to maintain and monitor the server. Multiple servers can be connected to a client server network, especially in larger ones. Each server is typically dedicated to a single task, for example printing, mail, e.c.t.

## Peer to Peer model:

In a Peer to Peer network, there is no central server and every computer is in a mesh network to each other. This type of network is suitable for a smaller company with fewer computers. No central server controls files or security, each individual computer needs to manage security. All computers can see files on all other computers. The computers connected can communicate amongst each other without needing to go through a server, if one goes down then data on it cannot be retrieved. P2P can also be used on a WAN for file sharing websites (e.g. the pirate bay). This allows for data to be passed between computers instead of solely through a server. Parts of data can be received from many computers in this model. One """disadvantage""" of P2P networks is that it is often used for piracy and sharing of copywrite media.

Cloud computing is a term for internet computing which uses remote servers run by other organisations such as Microsoft, drop box, e.c.t. No software has to be stored on a local device, only an interface. Software and data is accessable from anywhere and is backed up so that there is no danger of using it. Software and data does not occupy space on a users' device.

Networks can often be abstracted to graphs. This makes working with them and solving problems involving them easier. See [[Graph theory]] for more information.