HTTP can use request methods to interact with a database. Each of these commands has its CRUD and SQL equivlant. GET - request data, POST - submit data, PUT - upload a new resource, DELETE - removes a resource. These commands interact with a server database, seen in the [[Client server model]].

REST (REpresentational State Transfer) is an architectural style which determines how systems communicate with each other. REST uses HTTP request methods to interact with online databses. RESTful systems and APIs seperate the client from the server database, allowing either to be updated independantly. REST provides a framework for communication. A web server communicates using the REST API to a database server in order to obtain the correct data that a client has requested from the web server. This response is typically in JSON or XML format, which is interpreted by the client's browser.

JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is written in a standard programming form, similar to JavaScript, and can be directly used by JavaScript with many other languages. XML (Extensible Markup Language) has a format similar to HTML and wraps content in tags. These two formats are used to interchange data between clients and servers. JSON is considered to be the neatest format, as it is more compact, easier to read and write, and can be manipulated to javascript. However, JSON has a limited range of data types allowed. Any data type is allowed in XML, however its expansive use of tags makes it practically unreadable.