
Circuit switching involves the creation of a communication connection between two endpoints for the duration of a call or data transfer. This does not practically work for the billions of interconnected devices across the internet. Packet switching was developed in order to allow a communication channel to be shared so that when one communication was not using a connection, another could. A transmission can be multiplexed when more than one frequency of light are sent down a fibre optic cable. Because of the change in frequency, the signals do not interfere with each other and multiple "channels" of information can be sent down one cable simultaneously. Note that they may arrive at the end of the cable at different times, due to [[Optical fibres|modal light dispersion]].

## Packets:

Data is broken down into chunks, called packets, that are reassembled on the receiving end. This increases network information and reliability, as when one packet is lost it can always be resent, which will be a smaller size than resending an entire file. Packets are often sent across networks that have multiple links with many routes through to a destination. Latency is defined as how long a packet takes to reach its destination, often measured in milliseconds. 

Routers forward data packets from one network to another. Routers therefore need to know all available routes to a packet's destination node. When a router receives a packet, it will look up the destination IP of the packet in its routing table and find the best route for it to take. This process continues until a packet reaches its destination, each time it is received by a router is known as a "hop". When a packet reaches 30 hops, it is deleted. [[Dijkstra's algorithm]] is used for finding the optimal path for a packet to take.

At its core, a data packet is a segment of data that needs to be sent, often referred to as the payload. Packets also include additional information known as "headers" and "trailers". The header may include the senders IP address, the recipient's IP address, protocol, and which number packet in a transmission it is. The trailer may include an end of packet flag and a checksum. The process of adding on the trailer and header is known as encapsulation.

Packets are kept small as to ensure that individual packets will not take excessive time to transfer, which prevents other packets from moving. However, if a packet is made too small, data transfer becomes inefficient as headers and trailers still need to be added. The trailer of a packet often includes error checking components that verify data received in the payload has not been corrupted. Techniques like CRC (Cyclical Redundancy Checks) and checksums. If the checksum fails, the packet is requested to be resent, as this means the payload has been corrupted.

Gateways are required when data travelling from one network to another that uses different protocols. Header data is removed and reapplied using the correct format according to the new network. A router and a gateway are often combined into one device.

